[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio
news.
[Music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, I have a confession to make.
>> Yeah.
>> I do a lot of online shopping. Like a
lot. More than is healthy. Probably
>> more than I realize from looking over
your shoulder in the office and asking
you what you're looking up because I do
do that and you never like it, but I
still do it.
>> No, because sometimes I am in fact
shopping online in the office. But a few
years ago, I noticed a phenomenon, a
change when it came to online shopping.
You know what that was?
>> I can guess.
>> Yeah. All right. All of a sudden,
whenever I was checking out, you would
get an offer, a little button usually
that would say, "Do you want to take a
buy now, pay later option, and usually
it's with a company like CLA or a firm
or something like that?"
>> They're everywhere now.
>> So, like I've certainly seen all these
buttons. I've never used it. I don't
really know why I haven't because like
why shouldn't I spread out? Why
shouldn't I? Like for real, like my
understanding is that the core of the
business model works is that there's no
like formal interest, right? So if you
make a $100 purchase, you get to spread
it out say in four payments of $25. And
so whether it's $100 right now or $100
in four months, it's the same from the
end buyer, which of course in theory
because there's a time value of money is
not intuitive. But the idea is that the
retailer implicitly pays the interest
because it's a form of customer
acquisition. And so the retailer is
implicitly willing to take a $100 or
whatever over x period of time rather
than all at once in exchange for
essentially making it easier for
customers to buy. But from the customer
perspective, like you and me who
presumably have the money to make to buy
what we're purchasing, I still don't get
why we don't all use buy now pay later
because why not spread out our purchases
further out into the future.
>> You know how Rebel Wilson described it
in a firm commercial.
>> I didn't I don't I haven't seen it.
>> Like eating a tub of ice cream but
spreading out the calories over four
weeks.
>> Exactly. Why don't
>> it's still 600 calories, right? That's
the issue. But I think, okay,
>> so this is obviously a nuance subject.
>> Yes.
>> So clearly 0% interest doesn't sound
like a problem, but obviously if you
fail to pay,
>> right,
>> you pay a penalty fee,
>> then you then the penalties start
building up,
>> right? So there's that. But the other
issue with some of these buy now pay
later items, and it's really
interesting. I kind of think about this
as a parallel to the private market in
credit. So this idea that there's this
like whole world of additional credit or
leverage that we don't actually have
very good data on. Yeah. And that is
growing, right? I think that is the key.
>> So here's how I see the issue, which is
that if I could have a tub of ice cream
and spread out the calories over four
months, I would certainly do that. That
sounds pretty great because I burn a
certain number of calories in a day. And
so if I had four months to burn them,
that that would be far more efficient.
But the flip side is, well, I would eat
more ice cream. So, so I would eat four
times I would eat four times as many
tubs of ice cream in that given day
knowing that I have this fourmonth
calorie budget. And so then you still
get the question of like, okay, maybe
there's not a formal interest or maybe
there's penalties, but I'm buying a lot
more with today's buying power. And that
may still yet prove to be unsustainable
to the end consumer even if it doesn't
formally clock as what we measure as
consumer debt. Here's the added layer.
Let's say you're trying to lose weight
or trying to be healthy and you have
like a dietician.
>> Imagine eating the ice cream but him
never knowing that you're eating the ice
cream, right? Like this is
>> Well, I I lie to my doctors all the
time. I mean, I'm used to that.
>> Okay. All right. Rather than us debate
this, we do in fact
>> how much didn't do you Well, you know,
like once a week I like go through a 3
milligram thing. I did actually quit and
I'm saying it but
>> you told me this this morning. You said
you were not going to z
us talk about this, we do in fact have
the perfect guest. We're going to be
speaking with Julie Morgan. She is a
president of the Century Foundation,
formerly at the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau, the CFPB, where she
thought a lot about the buy now pay
later phenomenon. So we're going to get
some of her thoughts right now. Julie,
welcome to the show.
>> Thank you. I'm so excited to be here.
>> So, how did this happen? Like, how did
this business model actually come about?
Because it it felt very sudden to me,
but on the other hand, I was outside of
the US for a long time, so maybe it was
quite gradual.
>> I'm really excited to answer this
question for a number of reasons,
including the way that you all
introduced this because you spent a lot
of time talking about buy now, pay later
as this pay infor, zero interest, maybe
like no fee or low fee model. And we did
see that model arise during the pandemic
and become a much more salient part of
the way consumers were paying for goods
during the pandemic. And so if I could
take you back to kind of those early
years at the CFPB where we're coming out
of the pandemic, we're seeing this rise
in buy now pay later. You know,
regulators and researchers started to
investigate this to understand what it
meant for consumers and what the risks
were. And I think there were kind of two
fundamental assumptions about buy now
pay later at that time. One was just
what we said. It's a payinfor
no interest low or no fee model. And
then two people were using this in kind
of the like what I think of as a
stereotypical Gen Z kind of way. They
were using it to finance a purchase that
was slightly larger or more extravagant
than what they would have bought. And it
was usually on something like a purse or
an item of clothing. What we found over
time is that both of those assumptions
turned out to be wrong. Right? So number
one, what we're seeing right now as buy
now pay later and calling buy now pay
later is not in fact always that pay
inforest
product. And in fact many of the
companies that we associate with buy now
pay later like a firm or CLA are mostly
not offering that product. So a firm
says that product is only 20% of their
business. The rest of their business is
what I would think of as like a like
point of sale loans or short-term
installment loans with interest rates
ranging from, you know, 10 to 30% and
terms that range from 30 days to 6 or 18
months.
>> So, it's buy now pay later, but it's
more like just a formal loan.
>> Yeah. I mean,
>> it's payment in installment and there's
a schedule, but also there is a nominal
interest rate that's visible to the
consumer.
>> Exactly. And I think it is buy now pay
later in the sense that any loan
including your mortgage is buy now pay
later. Right? So they've they've kind of
kept this this marketing that I think
was really appealing to consumers and
that sort of soothed regulators
>> that these products were fairly low risk
and then started shifting that into
these products that look very different.
>> Okay. whether we're talking about the
new products or the sort of the
traditional BNPL the way Tracy and I
described it in the beginning currently
what kind of collection of data like
when that happens so we know like credit
card data gets collected there is public
statistics about just the sheer volume
of credit cards what do we have right
now in terms of where this gets slotted
and how it's collected as data
>> yeah we don't have a ton so we have a
couple of different ways of looking at
buy now pay later most of It is through
government sources. So the Federal
Reserve and the CFPB have the ability to
pull data from the companies. And if you
look at the CFPB's reports on buy now
pay later, that is what they're doing.
They're pulling transaction level data
through market monitoring orders. That's
not
>> these. But when you say market
monitoring orders, just to be clear, the
companies are compelled to regularly
update the CFPB with some level of data.
>> They're compelled to provide data, the
regularly piece is not part of it. So
this tends to be a oneoff, right? we
don't have a consistent stream of data
coming from the companies and so that
gives us like a small window into what's
happening in the buy now pay later space
but it's really not enough and then we
have survey data and that's where you
see lending tree and Axios and others
asking consumers and I I think it's
important to understand
>> that there you're just kind of getting
what the consumer thinks they have and
it's it really inhibits our ability to
get at are you using paying for are you
paying interest and all those things.
>> How does buy now pay later fit into
private credit scores like FICO, right?
Because I imagine, you know, if you're
applying to a bank, they're going to
look at your FICO score if you want
something like a mortgage. And even
though buy now pay later seems to be for
mostly smaller items at the moment. So
maybe you owe like a couple hundred or
something via a firm, maybe you also owe
a few thousand via CLA, right? And I
imagine if you're a bank using FICO
scores, you would want to know that
information.
>> Yeah. So, we don't know this information
right now. FICO announced recently that
they plan to start using buy now pay
later as part of their scoring model.
And we've seen the companies be
extraordinarily resistant to that. So,
CLA and others are saying that they're
not going to turn over data until they
get certain asurances from FICO about
how how that data is going to be used.
So the what we have right now is kind of
snapshots in time to understand how
people are stacking you know buy now pay
later on top of credit card debt and on
top of other products and the research
that we have there which is somewhat
limited does suggest that people are
stacking this you know it tells us that
about 60% of the people who are using
buy now pay later have a subprime credit
score it tells us that they are mostly
using it on top of credit card debt and
it's also suggesting that before people
take on buy now pay later. There's a
slight uptick in their use of their
credit card. So, there's a suggestion
that it's really like you're maxing out
one form of debt and then taking on
another.
>> I just looked up the Q2 New York Fed
household debt report. I think it just
came out a few days ago. I must have.
It's Q2. Anyway, it says there's 1.21
trillion in total credit card balances
outstanding. Do we have something that
we have a guess for what is the number
of BNPL loans of any form currently
outstanding so that we can benchmark
that against credit cards?
>> We have numbers that are reported by the
companies. We don't have data that is
reported by a government source like
that.
>> I think the the best we have is that the
transaction volume is around 116
billion. Okay. And that's up from about
13.8 billion in 2020. So this is is
growing pretty rapidly.
>> So it's not it's a nonzero. I mean it's
not like clearly like still like a
fraction of credit cards but this is
beyond a rounding error.
>> That's right.
>> Okay.
>> Do we have any sense of how usage
patterns have changed? So for instance,
you know, during the pandemic, did we
see an uptick in buy now pay later use
as people were struggling because they
didn't have jobs or had short-term cash
flow issues? Has it come down since
then?
>> We are seeing an uptick in people's use
of buy now pay later and we're seeing
shifting patterns of what they're using
it to purchase. So I think I said
earlier that there was this assumption
that people were using this to purchase
clothing or other kind of luxury goods
and you know even back in 2022 when the
CFPB put out its first report here we
saw that that wasn't true. People were
using buy now pay later for things like
groceries and education costs the
surveys that have come out recently
showed that that's growing. So there was
I think an Axio survey and a lending
tree survey. They showed somewhere
between 14 and 25% of buy now payer
users are using it to purchase
groceries. They're showing that a bigger
percentage of people are using bopelator
for medical and dental costs than for
the things people might assume
stereotypically it's used for like
dining out or ordering in or even like
purchasing concert tickets, things like
that.
[Music]
Is it bad? I mean, like, you know, it
seems like, oh, people are using buy now
pay later for dental or they're using it
for groceries or whatever. And like you
know the idea that people are obviously
stressed and have to spread out or
borrow money to make those purchases is
obviously I guess there is an inherent
angst about that because these are human
essentials. But is it really per se bad
or is it just like no this is like yet
another tool that people have to sort of
you know smooth consumption and so
forth.
>> I think it's bad that we're seeing an
uptick in the use of credit products to
pay for essentials. That's not to say
that buy now pay later is particularly
the enemy there. But, you know, this is
part of the reason I've been interested
in consumer credit overall is that, you
know, we see these broader changes go on
in the policy space. In particular,
recently we've seen Donald Trump and
Republicans in Congress push through a
bill that cuts Medicaid, cuts food
assistance, you know, makes education
more expensive. And the availability of
consumer credit products that are kind
of waiting in the wings there blunts our
ability to really understand what those
changes mean. So, you know, we know that
the Medicaid cuts will result in people
having more expensive health care, but
we need to be looking at the fact that
that's going to result in buy now pay
later loans. It's going to be an
opportunity for medical credit cards
from places like Synchrony with Care
Credit. And so, it's relevant to our
overall economic situation. It's
relevant to the kind of like what I
think of as like a silent financial
crisis that's happening for the vast
majority of families in the United
States, but it's not tracked. You know,
we've been talking about buy now pay
later really not being tracked, but the
overall sort of like consumer credit
conditions for families are really not
tracked and talked about in that way. We
see economists going on TV talking about
consumption and CPI and GDP. Yeah. Where
families are kind of sitting around the
kitchen table talking about CLA and a
firm and Sally May and Naviant. when you
were at the CFPB, how were you thinking
about buy now pay later from a sort of
regulatory perspective?
>> Yeah, so we were looking at the risks of
the products and then we were kind of
trying to look, you know, we've had this
phenomenon with consumer credit products
across the board, not just specific to
buy now pay later, but it was really
evident at CFB that you have these sort
of like new entrance into a market whose
products are framed very differently
than a traditional consumer credit
product. And it's often part of the
marketing pitch. It's like we're not
alone. We're not equity. We're this
totally different thing. And it pres on
consumers hesitance to use debt. And
then also, you know, this idea that we
might float above any regulatory scheme.
So for buy now pay later and for these
other products like earned wage access
or income share agreements, you know, we
were looking at like what is this under
the law? And with buy now pay later
particularly the products like where CLA
or a firm is offering basically like a
digital or physical card where you can
make repeated purchases where you have a
certain sounds starts to sound like a
credit card right and so you know CFB's
initial approach on regulation here was
to really just say like you've got to
follow some of the fundamental basics
that apply to the product that you are
right and so that was really meant to
help people with some of the real kind
of basic consumer protections around
managing disputes and getting accurate
billing statements. The other thing CFPB
was doing was on the enforcement and
supervision side. So really taking a
look at these companies the same way we
do any other financial institution and
making sure they're following the law.
And I think it's important to talk about
that piece because we've seen the Trump
administration pull back on the proposed
regulations, but we've also seen them
pull back on enforcement. They
specifically said they would depp
prioritize buy now pay later in
enforcement. And so there are these
other real basics that we're seeing fall
apart. You know, if you look at what
consumers are complaining about right
now, they're saying, "I had autopay on
my, you know, my CLA or my Afterpay and
I tried to take it off and the company
continues to charge me." These are like
really basic questions of whether the
companies are following consumer
financial laws and you know CFPP is just
off the job. So you mentioned that in
the research prior to someone beginning
to use BNPL there's an increase in their
credit card usage right why does someone
flip over like why doesn't so some of
these purchases what is insufficient
about the existing credit card system is
it that they're hitting their credit
limits or what is the situation such
that then BNPL becomes more attractive
>> yeah I think we need to take a deeper
look at credit utilization because I do
think there are people who are flipping
over and they're using their available
credit balance and then they're shifting
to buying a pay later. But I think there
are a lot of other people who are just
trying to juggle their essentials, you
know, their groceries and their kids
back to school clothes and they're doing
it through whatever feels like the most
convenient payment method. So the buy
now pay later companies have made a real
effort at being that convenient payment
method, both through kind of point of
sale, but also through their apps. So
they're pushing their users towards an
app that both makes it more convenient
to make the payment but also pushes you
advertisements for different products.
And so I think we see people brought in
there. But you mentioned earlier why you
don't use buy now pay later. And I do
think it's important to
>> great question. We could do a half hour
on on um your personal finances. I think
it's important to know that even while
there's a big percentage of people using
this to cover basics, there is kind of a
split in buy now pay later where if you
talk to consultants who who look at this
really closely, they're seeing people
like you or I who can I'm making an
assumption about your finances.
>> I get paid well.
>> Okay, cool. You know about like you or I
who can make a purchase but it's a
painful purchase. You know, maybe it's
like a new television or something that
you just don't want to pay upfront. So
there there are people using it in that
way too. Interesting.
>> You mentioned ease of use and I think
this is really key. What are the
conversations like with retailers? So
like what's the pitch that buy now pay
later platforms are going to make to I
don't know a Walmart or whoever to kind
of plug directly into their websites.
>> Yeah. So the pitch is basically basket
sizes and then overall transaction
volume. Right. So they're showing that
they're getting the retailers about 10%
more in terms of the basket size. So the
amount of things that people are
purchasing and then some of the
companies are reporting up to 80% more
in terms of the actual transaction. So
that's pretty significant for retailers
and I think it is what is propelling
retailers to cut deals with CLA or
Afterpay and to pay the costs which are
higher than Interchange on a credit
card. So in many cases, you know, we're
looking at costs that are somewhere
between 1 to 8% of the transaction plus
like a flat fee that might be like 30
cents per per transaction. So it's
pretty significant. I think the other
part of the pitch is, and this is this
is one of the pieces that was really
kind of consuming a lot of our attention
at CFB is the ability to use people's
data to drive those purchases. So, I
think if you're a merchant looking at
those big fees if you're a Walmart or
Amazon or whoever, you're not just
saying like, "Let me put this in CLA or
a firm's hands to hope that people use
it more, but let me use the data I have
on hand to try to drive more purchases."
And like, a company that has a lot of
information about what I like to buy and
a lot of information about how much
money I have to do it has like a pretty
potent set of data to help drive those
purchases. So I think that's part of the
appeal for merchants as well.
>> Do we have a way of essentially
measuring from the consumer's
perspective a sort of like for-l like
interest rate that they payment? Because
as you described like in some cases
they're clear, right? In some cases
they're more embedded because it's free
for four months but then there's like a
penalty. In some instances it's this
thing that looks like a credit card but
maybe structurally there's a different
way of getting from point A to point B.
Like can we measure like okay if this
were a credit card payment with a 15%
rate this is the apples to apples
compare you're paying 18% or 12% like
are we able to are you able to do that?
Me personally, I'm not I'm not able to
do that. But, you know, at the CFPB, we
did do that on certain products. We
didn't do that for buy now pay later in
many cases because the products we were
studying had almost no cost, right? They
were no interest and no fee. Maybe they
had a late fee that might kick in. But
remember, where they're requiring auto
payments, which most of the companies
are, those late fees are less likely to
be incurred. Sure. But I think the the
sort of relevant thing is to understand
how much people are paying overall in
excess fees and interest for the goods
and services that they need. And that's
incredibly difficult to do because these
companies are sort of layering these
different products. So you have a credit
card with a set interest rate, but you
might be incurring debt on a number of
different products across multiple BNPL
providers that each have different terms
and and different costs. So, it's really
difficult. I mean, it's difficult for us
to understand from a research
perspective. It's even more difficult
for a consumer, I think, to make those
choices and those trade-offs.
[Music]
Just going back to the data aspect of
this for a second. You said that some of
the platforms are reluctant to uh report
to FICO and are asking for certain
asurances. What exactly do they want
here?
>> I mean, I've looked into this question.
They haven't been super clear, I think,
about what they want. They've sort of
made some general statements that they
want to make sure that, you know,
reporting this data won't be used
negatively to affect people. I mean this
is really just my speculation but what I
think is really interesting about this
is the companies are playing on this
kind of broader skepticism about credit
reporting and FICO overall because I
think you know people's experience and
certainly what we saw in the research at
CFB is that you know credit reporting
has predominantly been used to ding
people and to coers them into making
payments they might not want to make. So
like medical debt is a great example of
that. CFPB's research showed it really
had no value for the fundamental purpose
of credit reporting which is evaluating
people's ability to repay um and it was
mostly being used to coers. So when CLA
says you know we want to make sure this
isn't used to ding people that feels
very noble but I I think at the end of
the day we should be kind of skeptical
of why they don't want to report.
explain this further about medical debt
and when you say it has no value but
also it's being used of course what are
the conditions with medical debt and
FICO.
>> Yeah. So we looked at medical debt and
credit reporting really closely at CFPB
and what we saw was that it didn't have
predictive value. So medical debt was
not predictive of whether you would
repay other types of debt. And part of
the reason is that a lot of medical debt
that is reported on people's credit
reports is inaccurate in one way or
another. You know, it might be that the
debt collector is going after you for a
debt that is larger than what you think
you pay because you think your insurance
company ought to have paid. It might be
that you actually already paid the debt
and that information hasn't gotten to
the debt collector. So, it's really kind
of this junk data that's sitting on
people's credit reports. And
>> and then explain the coercion element
like how does it So medical debt isn't a
good predictor of someone's ability to
pay a future loan,
>> right?
>> So it's not great for that. And yet what
it's still like people because it
affects their credit card scores feel
this extra pressure to pay it off. Like
explain the sort of like the effect on
the end the end patient in this case.
>> Yeah, exactly. So the constituency that
wants medical debt on your credit
reports is primarily third party debt
collectors. And why do they want that
there? they want it there so that they
can call you and say,
>> you know, pay this debt or it's going to
hurt your credit. And I think at CFPB,
we tried to spend a lot of time thinking
this through from the consumer
perspective and what that feels like.
>> So, actually, I was not familiar with it
all, but just to go further, is this
like I I hadn't really thought about the
sort of behindthe-scenes fight of what
does and doesn't go into a FICO, but
obviously that's very intuitive. Is this
like a common thing across a range of
either formal debt products or quas debt
products where they're all like sort of
jocking either to be in or out of the
calculation basket?
>> I mean, I think it is the medical debt
is a thing because CFPB made it a thing.
I don't think we have enough research on
what is or isn't on your credit report
and why. But when regulators start to to
>> pick those fights, Yeah. you start to
get this jockeying for for what's on
there. I think student debt is another
good example where there are legitimate
questions of what ought to and not not
be on there. And some of it is about the
predictive value, but a lot of it is
about putting debt on people's credit
reports that we know is inaccurate. It
is true that every few years we see like
these efforts from private companies, I
guess, to try to augment credit scores
with new technology. So, I remember very
clearly being at a startup's offices in
San Francisco in like I guess it would
have been 2015 or something and they
were walking me through the data that
they could use to make short-term loans.
And one of the things they were talking
about was like just the basic cursor
movement on the screen. Like how fast
you click the button to get money.
Whether or not you know if it's a
sliding bar that goes from like $1,000
to $10,000. Like whether or not you
hesitate to go to 10,000 and then go
back and then go back to 10,000 again.
It seemed very dystopian to me. And I'm
curious what those efforts are like
right now given the new emphasis on AI
and maybe you know even more data that
is now available to private companies to
look at to try to judge whether people
are creditworthy or not.
>> Yeah. If you listen to the earnings
calls where CEOs are talking to
investors about their underwriting
models for a variety of different
products whether it's kind of
traditional credit cards or things like
BNPL AI comes up a lot. you know,
everybody sort of wants to say that
they've got this proprietary AI model.
>> That's exactly it. Yeah. They're they
were saying the same thing 10 years ago.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And I think there's a lot of
things to unpack there and to be
concerned about. So, I think we should,
you know, we know that AI models often
bake in racial biases. So we know that
there's some concern there about these
models, you know, but I also think to
your point there, we're dragging in a
lot of extraneous data about people into
the way we look at their
creditworthiness. Some of which should
be relevant, some of which really should
not. And what I think is most important
to think about there is that those
models are completely opaque. And
companies often when they're faced with
regulatory scrutiny say kind of like the
AI did it, right? as though the the
people at the companies are not
responsible for the outcomes of the
technology. So, you know, under the
Biden administration, the approach there
had really been to say, you're
responsible. This, it sounds so basic,
but the laws are the laws. Whether it's
about consumer protection or about, you
know, basic discrimination among credit
applicants, the laws are the laws and
you're responsible for the outcomes of
those models. And I think that shift is
or that kind of approach is really
really important here to drive some
accountability because otherwise it does
kind of get out of hand.
>> So I mentioned in the intro that the
parallel that I reach for when thinking
about buy now pay later is sort of
private credit. So this idea that you
know it's a more opaque market and
people are worried about its size and
they're worried about transparency and
hidden leverage and all of that. But on
the other hand, you know, it is an extra
credit spigot that companies can tap in
times of emergency and we certainly saw
that over the past 5 years or so. Net
net, when you look at buy now pay later,
would you say the effects are good, more
good or more bad? This is a tough one.
>> It is a really tough one because I don't
I said this earlier. I I don't want to
single out buy now pay later as the bad
guy here. I think first of all there are
a lot of bad guys. There are a lot of
good guys too. But, you know, I think
the thing to really focus on is like
we're in what the Trump administration
is describing as like a relatively good
economy and we're sitting here talking
about like turning on the spigot for
these kind of like new and interesting
types of debt to help people handle
really basic expenses.
>> That seems like a problem. We should not
be in an emergency situation and yet we
are. And so I'm concerned that that
availability of these credit products is
obscuring like the kind of growing
emergency around people's cost of living
which often you know in the news is
about their grocery prices, the eggs,
their sneakers for back to school and
those are really important but it's also
their health care, the cost of college,
being able to retire. So families are
feeling really squeezed and you know to
me the most important thing there is
like we're I think we're seeing the
Trump administration sort of test out
this theory that they can keep the
highlevel metrics of whether the economy
is on track steady or growing while
letting somewhere around 60% of people
have these private financial crises.
We're going to see that play out over
the next couple of years. And so that's
that's the way I think about these
credit products. It's not really like is
the individual one good, but it's like
do we know what we're doing overall and
is anyone doing the math?
>> All right, Julie Morgan, thank you so
much for coming on ALA. It's really
appreciated.
>> Thank you. Thanks for having me.
[Music]
>> Joe, I'm glad we finally did that
episode. We've been talking about doing
one on BNPL for a while. BNPL it always
reminds me of like it sounds like BMP
Paraba's like Italian subsidiary or
something, but there are a bunch of
things to pick out there. I mean, number
one,
>> it's clearly a nuanced issue, right? And
like clearly, as you laid out in the
intro, it can have a smoothing effect.
>> Yeah.
>> The second thing that always seems to
come up is this idea that like well
>> it's not that big now, right? like it's
not big enough to have an effect right
now.
>> But as Julie mentioned, we are seeing,
you know, volumes slowly pick up and I
guess
>> not that slowly.
>> Not that slow. Yeah, you're right. And I
guess like I kind of wonder what happens
like as more and more of this activity
actually stretches into services versus
goods. Like that seems to be quite a big
shift. Well, I'd say like I I think uh
Julie's last point was very relevant,
which is like, you know, when we think
about household borrowing and again
probably you and I because we're sort of
children of uh or you know, grew up
during the financial crisis, you know,
we sort of think about like
>> we weren't children.
>> No, we were children, but you know what
I'm saying? You know, I think you and I
often think about credit from the
effects of defaults and so forth. And
that could be an effect and that's not
something to be dismissed. But the other
idea is like how much of like sort of
like aggregate economic conditions
consumption is sort of debt financed and
in a way that we can't like fully
measure, right? Because we comfortably
can measure credit card debt and so we
have some sense of credit card debt is
the size of incomes or whatever. But if
there's this other rapidly growing
source and it's pretty crucial for like
sort of keeping the headline figures of
consumption or GDP, you know, like my
conclusion or like my sense is like
yeah, it's not that huge yet, but it's
definitely not nothing and it's
definitely not, you know, it's bigger
than a rounding error,
>> right? And it certainly says something
to Julia's point about like the state of
the average American consumer who
probably is struggling to pay something
like dental fees.
>> Yeah. Yeah. No. And like the fact and
like um you know I think there's I
thought it was interesting too that like
maybe both of us or at least just me had
a certain maybe already outdated view of
what BNPL is. Oh yeah because like the
idea of like oh I'm going to buy
>> I didn't realize that they had like
actual apps.
>> Yeah. So the idea that like oh I'm going
to buy a television that's $1,000 and
make it like four $250
purchases. Like that sounds great. I
should I should be doing this. But if
that's just sort of like one business
model, but that there's like this
growing business model that looks more
like installment loans where there is a
formal interest rate, but it also sort
of looks like the same thing and you
also get a card, etc., but it's just
like a slightly different structure and
formally it isn't called debt or isn't
categorized or isn't reported as debt,
then I then I think obviously we need to
continue to get a better handle on, you
know, how big this is.
>> Yeah, absolutely. Also, Clara says it's
a bank now, which is kind of confusing.
Yeah. Um,
>> everyone,
>> it's like the hottest thing everyone
wants. Everyone's always filing for bank
charters these days.
>> Oh, yeah. That would be interesting to
look at because we went after the
financial crisis. Speaking of 2008, we
went years and years and years a
like every random brokerage or fintech.
Oh, we got a bank charter. We acquired a
company that has a bank charter.
>> Time is a flat circle, Joe. Yeah.
>> All right. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the
OddLotss podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. can follow me at
the stalwart. Follow our guest Julie
Morgan. She's J Marggeta. Follow our
producers Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen
Arman. Dashel Bennett at Dashbot and
Kale Brooks at Kalebrooks. For more
OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlots
where we have a daily newsletter and all
of our episodes. And you can chat about
all of these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss.
And if you enjoy OddLotss, if you like
it when we talk about the state of
consumer debt, then please leave us a
positive review on your favorite podcast
platform. And remember, if you are a
Bloomberg subscriber, you can listen to
all of our episodes absolutely adree.
All you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
Oh
yeah.
[Music]